6.0 English
From BBCLearningEnglish.com
Hello this is 6 minute English from BBCLearningEnglish.
I'm Neil and I'm Beth.
In China their crescent shaped and filled with pork and cabbage
in Nepal they're called Momos and are fried with buffalo meat.
In Ireland they're soaked in Guinness gravy
and Italians filled them with spinach and call them Noki.
They can be steamed or fried and are found all over the world.
I'm talking of course about dumplings.
Dumplings are a group of dishes where a filling is wrapped inside pieces of cooked dough.
They're basically dough envelopes with a filling inside.
Filling can be anything from meat and fish to vegetables, tofu or cheese
and the dough is usually based on a starchy grain like wheat, rice, corn or potato.
In fact the English word dumpling comes from a 17th century adjective, dump, meaning dough like.
The really amazing thing about dumplings is that they're found all over the world.
Over the centuries different countries and regions have experimented with flavours and fillings
to create something unique.
Wherever in the world you are there's probably a special kind of dumpling for you.
In this programme we'll be sampling a dumpling from the West African country of Ghana.
And as usual we'll be learning some useful new vocabulary as well.
Great, but first I have a question for you, Beth.
Probably the most famous British dumplings, Stuart dumplings, are cooked on top of a chicken or beef stew
that made from soot but what exactly is that?
Is soot a wheat, b, potato or sea animal fat?
I think so it is made from animal fat.
Okay Beth, we'll find out if that's the correct answer later in the programme.
The origins of dumplings are a mystery.
Historians think the dish is very old but no one knows for sure when or where the first dumpling was cooked.
One theory puts the birthplace of the dumpling along the silk road,
linking China with central Asia and Turkey.
One way or another the dumpling journey through the Middle East and across Africa to Ghana,
where today it's a favourite way of adding carbohydrates to a dish, as well as soaking up sources and juices.
Kaffiri Agida is a businesswoman and fan of the Ghanaian dumpling called Kengki.
Here she introduces Kengki to Ruth Alexander, presenter of the BBC World Service programme The Food Chain.
I love Kengki. If I don't have Kengki, this afternoon you've had some this afternoon.
Yes, I love it. And it hits the spot.
Absolutely. And it's a Gauwa, where the Gauwa is one of the tribes in Ghana and Kengki is the ass-table food.
Even though it's eaten across the whole country.
How is it done eaten?
Now we have to eat Kengki with what we call Chilisos.
But we also have the black sauce, which shrems fish and also of proteins in it.
And then Yam Yam you go at it, you dig in.
So is this really satisfying comfort food?
It is very satisfying. In fact, Kengki is loved by most people who do manual works,
because it feels the tummy and it takes you almost a whole day before you, you feel hungry again.
Kafiri says eating Kengki really hits the spot.
If something hits the spot, it's exactly what you wanted and totally satisfies you.
Kengki dumplings are made from May's sour dough and eaten across Ghana.
For some tribes, Kengki is their staple food.
A basic and important type of food that is regularly eaten by a large portion of the population.
In Britain, for example, bread and eggs are staple foods.
Kengki takes time to make. The May's needs to be soaked in water for a week.
But when they're ready and served with a hot chili sauce, Kafiri uses two phrases to show its time to eat.
Yam Yam is used to say that food tastes or smells very good.
And again, is another exclamation, meaning don't wait.
Start eating and eat as much as you like.
For Ghana, Kengki is comfort food, something which is enjoyable to eat and makes you feel happier.
And what's more, it fills your tummy or stomach.
Whatever type you eat and wherever in the world you eat them, dumplings are a great way to spread a little love, including in Britain.
Yes, it looks like we're back to my earlier question.
I asked you what the traditional British Suit dumpling is made from.
Beth Gest, it was animal fat, which was the correct answer.
Suit dumplings aren't the healthiest, but for some, they're certainly comfort food.
Food that makes you feel happier because it tastes good or because it reminds you of home.
Okay, let's recap the rest of the vocabulary we've learned in this program.
Starting with the idiom hits the spot, meaning that something is satisfying and exactly what you wanted.
A staple food is a basic and important type of food that is regularly eaten by a large portion of the population.
The exclamation Yam Yam is used to say that food tastes or smells delicious.
If you say dig in, you're inviting someone to start eating as much as they want.
And finally, tummy is an informal word for stomach.
Once again, our six minutes are up, but remember to join us again next time for more trending topics.
And useful vocabulary here at 6 Minute English. Goodbye for now.
Goodbye.